(heroic music)
February 1777, the Continental Army
settles into winter encampments at Morristown, New Jersey.
Hard-won victories at Trenton and Princeton
have turned the tide of war in their favor.
(heroic music)
But General Washington now faces an enemy
more dangerous than any British soldier.
In that day and age it was normal
that armies lost more men to disease
than they did to battle.
The worst of the worst was smallpox.
(heroic music)
When the Revolutionary War begins,
this is an extremely unsettling event.
You have American soldiers being called
from all the 13 colonies.
So all of a sudden you have these people
who have lived either in tiny cities or in farms,
and they're all together in camps by the thousands.
So the infection rates from smallpox
suddenly starts spiking.
Inoculation is risky.
Live smallpox virus is rubbed into an open wound.
Washington knows a small percentage of his men
will die from the procedure.
But without it, he could lose most of them.
And he has to keep it secret from the British,
because if the British learn that one-third
of the American army is not effective because
they're recovering from their inoculations,
they might try a winter attack.
So this all has to be done on the sly.
It all has to be done quietly.
It's a huge feat of organization.
The result of it is that the Continental forces
under Washington are safe from this terrible disease.
(heroic music)